Announce ESC CLI retirement; add pulumi env migration guide (#20401)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/esc-cli-retiring-use-pulumi-env/index.md

---

> title: "The Standalone ESC CLI Is Retiring: Use pulumi env"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "The Standalone ESC CLI Retired: Use pulumi env"
```

        Keeping both around stopped making sense. One binary to install, one login to manage, one place to look things up — that matters whether the operator is a person or an agent.

        So esc v0.26.0 is the final standalone release. The repository is archived and the code now lives in pulumi/pulumi.

        If you already use the Pulumi CLI, nothing changes for you. If you use esc, the switch is mostly mechanical, with a handful of commands that don't follow the pattern.

        We wrote up the migration, command by command.
    bluesky: |
        esc v0.26.0 is the last standalone ESC CLI release. The repo is archived, and every command now lives under pulumi env in the Pulumi CLI.

        Swapping esc for pulumi env covers most of them. The ones it doesn't cover are the ones worth knowing. We documented all of them.
---

[Pulumi ESC](/docs/esc/) CLI v0.26.0 is the latest standalone release. We encourage users to use the [Pulumi CLI](/docs/iac/cli/) instead.

The [ESC repository](https://github.com/pulumi/esc) has been archived and the code now lives under [pulumi](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi).

<!--more-->

> We have decided to stop delivering ESC as a standalone CLI. The `pulumi env` commands were never a reimplementation — the Pulumi CLI has built them from the ESC CLI's own code since ESC's first release, which is why the same command surface has always been available under [`pulumi env`](/docs/iac/cli/commands/pulumi_env/).

Reviewer: Pretty technical detail. Not sure if we need to mention it.

Author: I think since our intended audience are engineers, a bit of detail might be worth for "empathy" (and engagement)

Author: Kept it, but demoted it (see the thread above). It now lives in `### The same code all along` under the "why" section, framed as "if you're wondering what actually changes under the hood" — out of the lead, still there for engineers who want the detail.

> We have decided to stop delivering ESC as a standalone CLI. The `pulumi env` commands were never a reimplementation — the Pulumi CLI has built them from the ESC CLI's own code since ESC's first release, which is why the same command surface has always been available under [`pulumi env`](/docs/iac/cli/commands/pulumi_env/).

Reviewer: This does not read pretty well as first paragraph. I would expect this to be kind of an appendix. I would expect the `Why are we making this change` being the first paragraph.

Author: Restructured — the post now opens with **Why are we making this change**. The shared-code detail moved down into a `### The same code all along` subsection at the end of that section, so it reads as background rather than the lead.

---

[Pulumi ESC](/docs/esc/) CLI v0.26.0 is the latest standalone release. We encourage users to use the [Pulumi CLI](/docs/iac/cli/) instead.

The [ESC repository](https://github.com/pulumi/esc) has been archived and the code now lives under [pulumi](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi).

<!--more-->

## Why are we making this change

Pulumi ESC is the best way to store and manage configuration and secrets in your Pulumi programs and while you can certainly use ESC to store secrets and configurations for your applications or to manage your AI agents' credentials, it's still a core feature of [Pulumi Cloud](/docs/iac/guides/basics/pulumi-cloud-vs-oss/), and we want to make sure we deliver a consistent experience across our entire suite.

In addition to consistency, ESC and the Pulumi CLI share a lot of capabilities to interface to Pulumi Cloud and we want to make it easier and simpler for our customers: it's now easier to understand which Pulumi organization you are working with, which user is logged in, etc.

### Playing nicer with humans and AI agents

> A single CLI means one binary to install, one login to manage, and one place to look things up. That matters whether the operator is a person or an agent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single CLI means one binary to install, one login to manage, and one place to look things up. This simplicity is beneficial whether the operator is a person or an agent.
```
